So now we're going to bring all this together and we're going to build a simple multi-user chat
application that moves data through the server using Ajax and JSON. So the idea here is we've got a
simple chat and things are going to happen and we're going to use two tabs to simulate two users
and the idea is whatever you enter in the first tab it's going to asynchronously merely appear in
the second tab and we're going to use polling to do this and we're going to use polling every four
seconds which is a very inefficient way to do this but for now it's the simplest way I can show you
in a hurry what's going on. Every four seconds both windows are making a request to this URL called
messages that is a JSON endpoint and they get back an array of the recent messages both the
message text and a little nice time indicator like a minute ago or two minutes ago or something like
that so this happens every four seconds and that's why this is not at all best practice
not only is it not best practice for that but I'm returning an array in JSON and you're really not
supposed to do that you're supposed to return an object even if the main data is an array you want
an outer encapsulating object but again I'm trying to keep this as simple and short as I possibly
can. So if we take a look at the urls.py and again I got a nice walkthrough if you want to see this
version and walkthrough I have the main view that's talk and then messages is that a JSON view
and I have a little spinner that you can see when it first starts up and then there's a simple model
where we've got some text and who typed it in and what time it was created and if there's
any updating in this case there's no updating but we need the date of the thing so we can say it's
two minutes ago and so if you take a look at the views.py the talk main simply shows the main page
and then is done and when we hit the chat button or post button it comes back to the post and we
save the message and then we redirect back to ourselves back to the talk so if you look at the
the template talk.htm you see we have a simple form that's got a text field and a submit button
name post and importantly this div id chat content that has a spinning gif as its content and you're
going to see that we're going to delete this and so one of the reasons I make it wait two seconds
is that you can see this when it comes up and you can see the spinner happening but then once
the javascript takes over it actually deletes the spinner and replaces it with the messages so this
div is a placeholder for us to put the chat content which we're going to put in using javascript
and here's the main javascript we have a function called update message and it does a fetch and it
does a fetch to the uh to the url messages the cache note store just says every time I ask to
fetch it give me a new copy of it and then I have a couple of promises the first promise says the
response has been started and I'd like to retrieve the response and convert it as if it were json
data and then the second promise takes as its parameters the converted json data meaning the
the rows with a z is an object which in this case is an array and so we we we basically uh
log that so we can see it then we go and say document get my id chat content that's that div
inner html is nothing that is deleting either the previous list of messages or the spinner so we're
going to empty it out and then we're going to fill it back up so we're going to loop through this
set of rows that we got back and for each row we're going to append a paragraph tag so plus
equals there is appending to the current inner html we can just treat this inner html as a variable
right we can read it and we can write it and plus equals means we're appending to it we append a p
tag we append the first part of the row which is the message then a br tag in two non-breaking spaces
and then the second part which is how long ago it was which we generated in the server
and then the end of a p tag and then we set a timeout so that we do this again in four
four seconds four thousand milliseconds actually and then there's a catch that just alerts now
the way this stuff usually works is that um it usually works or it blows up badly and so
i just have a catch that says here's the error and hopefully it doesn't happen very often but
maybe use the error could either be i made a mistake in the server and if you're doing
software development chances are good that you're going to make a mistake in the server and that's
a reason to put this alert there in the real world once your server code is nice and clean
it doesn't have errors in it then they probably lost their network connection or your server went
down or something like that in the middle of you know every four seconds getting this new data
and then at the end we have an event listener dom content loaded which we've talked about before
and we simply have run a function to do a set timeout of update message two seconds after the
dom content is loaded and that's what these lines tell us to do and remember that update
message doesn't actually call it right there it's in a string and it says after two seconds
parse this javascript string and run it and that's what's happening here
so we take a look at views.py we we're doing a get request and this is the one where we're
sending a json response we're going to retrieve the messages the most recent 10 messages ordered
into sending order by created at and then we're going to process it now it's pretty common not to
just send the objects back we want to do a little processing and so we're sending back the message
text and then this natural time which is a django library that makes up this 13 minutes ago 14
minutes ago we go through the array that is the list of objects that we got from django's model
and then we're going to make another one which is the only the pieces we want to give to our
front-end code and then we return a json response with results which is an array which then is
serialized into an array and it's actually an array of arrays and that is serialized then into
an array of an arrays and sent back to it and then we go back to the code here if you look there
that is looping through the data that came back from the messages view in json and so you know
again that's what happens it's just every four seconds it runs through and retrieves the json
clears out that div then fills it back up with whatever they are and if nothing changed you don't
even see a blink it all happens so rapidly partly because it's all done asynchronously and that is
that we are not actually touching the dom until we've got the data to replace it and then we
do it so fast and we're done and then we give the browser back the thread and then it redisplays
which means it's not kind of displaying one piece at a time you are modifying the dom and it doesn't
update the window until you return from the function so in summary json is very powerful
these are pretty short lectures actually it is very well supported and performs extremely well
in many languages i mean it's over 20 years old now and it's every language has to be really good
at json back in the early days you'd have to go find a json library now it's just built in it's
built into the browsers it's built into python it's built into php it's built into everything
and so python and and jango and javascript have excellent support so it's a great way to build
applications